Notes
2.49 KB • 29 extracted lines
Formatting may be inconsistent from source.
V
the idea of existence requires identifying a boundary between self and other. just as a quantum measurement makes this distinction for a qft probability cloud so i believe god’s will did to the ontological landscape of forms

and thus he created a distinction between
- day and night
- earth and sea
- sun and moon
- heaven and land
etc

the first distinction he made was between past (father) and present (son)

demons as malevolent forces are what the dying spirits actually are

but they feed off of death and so they are looking for a new substrate to possess once their work on earth is complete

the issue is not the distinction but how one orients their self wrt the other

one either accepts or rejects the other. rejection can be either ‘i want you to become like me so that my Self territorializes the land of the Other’ or it can be ‘i’m going to ignore the other and pretend only self exists’

satan means resistor. While the resistor may disguise himself as an angel of lights, i.e., a false Scott, he ultimately works in the exact opposite direction of God. Where God creates differentiation and order, the resistor creates homogenization and entropy. While God evolves the universe forward from a state of undifferentiated potentiality into differentiated actuality, Satan attempts to disentangle and flatten the formative landscape back into primordial oneness (with himself ofc)

this goes back to the relation between self and other. Love is an unconditional acceptance of the other as distinct from the self. Whereas fear is a hostile stance towards the other that attempts to either conquer or ignore it. Satan has taken a hostile stance toward the other and attempting to reunify all others into himself. OTOH, the ransom sacrifice, enables God to accept the other despite us being sinners.

it is deduced from a first principle’s metaphysical approach to understanding existence

we say something exists when we can distinguish between what that thing is and what it is not. Mathematically, this is the process of reducing entropy, which self organizing systems like living breathing human bodies often manage to do for several decades. 

but there is also the larger concept of distinguishing what the universe is from what it is not. Of course there is nothing that exists that the universe is not but that at least allows us to define a boundary between the ontological universe and our material universe. The ontological universe itself is intrinsically limited by what statements can be internally consistent