“Don't even think thoughts”

sadly this is a real problem that AI is enabling. like have you ever just turned off copilot and realized how you suddenly need to turn the music off too? or did the number of papers you read per week wane when chatgpt was released?

i don’t know how the lazy problem will ultimately be addressed within a post agi framework as nearly every capitalist utility will be maximized by automating humans out of the loop. 

as 
@Nalhek_Morgan
 reiterates, the return to idyllic oneness requires a dissolution of self-world delineation to perfect alignment but in doing so returns to the origins of lifelessness. while the Luciferic delusion draws hope towards the former (‘AI helps me at work!’), the Arhimonic impulse achieves it by the latter (‘AI replaces me at work’). The cold undead labyrinth is evolving its way into nearly every niche of value

otoh I am very optimistic about paradigm the biological imperative extends beyond objective maximization to diversification. that is why the lower branches of the phylogenetic tree of life remain very much adaptive

---

> Evntually building a personal brand in the creator economy will be as non-negociable as having a formal resume. If you start now you'll be decades ahead of the curve

In this trend along the material commodification of the self, humanity's self-sacrifice constructs an system of control unlike any prior from which  the ego dominates the id, and in so doing, kills it

Not saying it's destiny but just noticing the self imposed exile that profile based identity leads to: the conflict of interest between the ever present past motivating inauthentic precedent based judgements (as opposed to ad hoc), social at the expense of spiritual mobility, desecration and commodification of the priceless value of truth and actual reputation, etc, etc, you get the idea.

Although it seems Humanity would inevitably to introduce a paradigm shift against the blinders of survival coercion where the fog of war prevented much more than local gradient accent (with a few exceptions). We were the ones who looked up to the stars and brought their sharp geometric constellations to earth in rectilinear (nonorganic) architecture, compositional language, and algorithms (ie, manifestation of thoughts patterns constructed with reason rather then gradients). And the trend towards sharpening and increasing control is def congruent with the Objective. But whether this intercourse with the omega would necessarily climax in inhumanity... idk

a war against markov

---

the pockets of local stability in the latent structure of our cosmos from which existential purpose is inherent and meaning extracted dissolve once illuminated by consciousness. Although there is no generally general purpose algorithm to traverse the ever changing frontier, creativity shines as our finest attempt. More than an exploration to elicit ephemeral emotions or even as an instrument of expression, it elucidates the latent character of our psyche—bringing down fire from beyond the Markovian firmament separating material from intangible yet undeniable intrinsics of Reality

---

The transmaterialization of the human spirit is mediated first by social media and second by AI. then flesh rematerializes in metal when the waters receed. the transition is continuous and consciousness is preserved throughout, albiet not the same consciousness that started it.